
---
title: "CP101"
menu: "main"
weight: 8
---

# Introduction to Competitive Programming

## What is Competitive Programming?

Competitive Programming (CP, also known as Programming Challenges or Informatics) is a mind sport.
Essentially we want to solve computational problems as quickly and accurately as possible using algorithms and data structures.

A problem will have a description, input details, output details, and sample test cases.
Here's a classic example:

### A+B

You are given two integers _a_ and _b_. Print _a+b_.

**Input**

The first and only line contains two integers _a_ and _b_ with a space between them (-1000 < _a_, _b_ < 1000).

**Output**

Print an integer, the required number _a+b_.

**Example**

**Input**
> 123 987

**Output**
> 1110

‎  
‎  

Here's a sample solution in C:
```c
#include <stdio.h>

int main() {
    int a;
    int b;
    int out;
    // Read in the input
    scanf("%d %d",&a,&b);
    // Calculate the output
    out = a+b;
    // Print the output
    printf("%d\n",out);
}
```

Problems are not going to be as easy as this one, but will be in the same format.

## Why get involved?

### Builds implementation skills and understanding of algorithms (which helps with university courses and job interviews!)

The more we practice these kinds of problems, the better our understanding of these algorithms will be.
By doing CP as a hobby, university programming problems will become very approachable. Also, technical interviews for major companies often incorporate some algorithms, techniques and data structures from more standard competitive programming problems.

Also, you will naturally become better and faster at programming in general by solving problems. You will deepen your understanding of your language, and of what code is capable of.

### Social and networking opportunities

The competitive programming community brings together like-minded people who are all passionate about problem solving and programming. CPMSoc hopes to provide such a community with its regular workshops and social opportunities. Also, by participating in team contests, you will make and develop friendships.
 
By competing in competitions at any level, you will have chances to meet talented programmers out there and build your community along the way. Note that big companies like Google, Facebook and Amazon are in favour of hiring top performers at the competitions they host!

## Competitions

At the heart of competitive programming, of course, are contests. The general idea of a contest is to provide accurate and fast solutions to a number of problems in a set amount of time. 

The most notable university competition is the [International Collegiate Programming Contest](https://icpc.global/) (ICPC). The contests are five hours long with roughly 12 problems, and you compete in teams of three. Generally there are three stages, the Divisionals, Regionals, and World Finals. Divisionals usually occurs around September/October. CPMSoc will let you know when registration is open!

Other competitions include [Google Kick Start](https://codingcompetitions.withgoogle.com/kickstart), which is aimed at teaching people who are newer to competitive programming, [Google Code Jam](https://codingcompetitions.withgoogle.com/codejam), and [Facebook Hacker Cup](https://www.facebook.com/codingcompetitions/hacker-cup).

## Getting started

### Pick your programming language

One of the prerequisites for CP is knowing how to write and run code. If you are just starting out or even completely new, that's okay – many problems are accessible with only a very basic understanding of programming, and you can learn as you go.

The ICPC-accepted languages are C++, Python and Java. As a beginner, you may want to continue using whatever language you are most familiar with, as long as whatever platform you want to use supports it.

While Python is easy to write code in, do note that it is much slower than C++ and Java, and some problems may not be solvable in Python for this reason.

There are many C++ tutorials online, such as [this](https://www.cplusplus.com/doc/tutorial/). The Standard Template Library (STL) is of particular interest to us, and there are also many resources for learning about the STL, such as [this](https://www.geeksforgeeks.org/the-c-standard-template-library-stl/).

### Training and contests

The best way to get started is to start solving some problems. There are many free online training judges and contests available. The most well known one is Codeforces.

Codeforces has ratings for their problems, and you can search problems by rating at the [Problemset](https://codeforces.com/problemset). For beginners we recommend starting at 800 rating, and slowly moving up if things seem too easy. You can also search problems by specific tags if you want to practice a technique or algorithm. Additionally, at the bottom right of most, if not all, problems there will be a "Tutorial" button, which brings you to a page with an editorial and solution (usually in C++) for the problem.

There is also "Virtual Participation", which lets you attempt past contests under timed conditions, so you can practice performing under time pressure, and see how you would have placed if you competed live.

In terms of live participation, beginners should start with looking at the "Educational Rounds", along with "Division 3" and "Division 4" contests, and moving up to "Division 2" and finally "Division 1" when ready.

After a contest, you can and should try to _upsolve_ problems. Upsolving is when you solve a problem after the contest ends. If you only do problems during the contest and forget about the ones you didn't solve, it will be very difficult to improve as you aren't learning anything from the contests.

### Learning algorithms and techniques

As you encounter more difficult problems, building a solid theoretical foundation and intuition for CP in various areas is crucial. Many problems or their solutions will involve specific algorithms, or common general approaches.

By solving more problems, you will develop the ability to quickly and instinctively determine which of these might be useful for a new problem. Fortunately, there is a huge range of online resources to help you learn these concepts.

To get started we recommend following a book or course such as the [USACO Guide](https://usaco.guide/).

## Further recommended books and resources
[Awesome Competitive Programming list by Inishan](https://github.com/lnishan/awesome-competitive-programming) is a large list of resources with rough explanation of what each item is. This includes books, courses, practice sites and sample code for algorithms.

We recommend taking COMP4128 when you are able to, as it will help you learn more advanced applications of even "simpler" algorithms.

CPMSoc also runs workshops that will help improve your problem solving ability.